Finally in this video we are going to
discuss a very interesting class of
quantum phenomena that appear
in the presence of slow or
so-called adiabatic
time-dependent perturbations.
And such adiabatic perturbations give rise
to a very elegant mathematical structure
and, in particular, to so-called geometric
Berry phase that we're going to derive.
So this Berry phase was discovered
theoretically by Sir Michael Berry in this
paper published in 1984 in the Proceedings
of the Royal Society of London.
And this is a really very well-written and
elegant paper.
And actually, even though it's
a research level paper, which in all
likelihood may lead to a Nobel Prize for
Sir Michael Berry,
you are well-equipped to actually
understand everything in this paper.
So both the derivation and the final
results because it requires nothing but
the basic knowledge of single
particle quantum mechanics,
the Schroedinger equation.
So we're going to reproduce part of
the derivation into this lecture
in this part, but of course,
if you want to know more details,
I would like to refer you to the original
paper, which again is very well-written.
So the problem that
Sir Michael Berry considered was,
well, in retrospect a very simple problem.
So basically it was the canonical
Schroedinger equation with some
time-dependent Hamiltonian,
and he assumed two things.
He looked into adiabatic perturbation,
that is to say that, so
the time dependence, In H(t)
is assumed to be slow.
What it means precisely we are going to
define in the next few slides, but
at this stage let's just leave it at that.
So we have some very slowly
changing Hamiltonian.
And also,
let's assume that the Hamiltonian
returns to itself after a certain period,
let me call it capital T.
So basically we have a periodical
time slow perturbation.
And the question that he asked is,
what happens with
the wave function as we get to
this moment of time capital T?
So what is the wave function
at the final moment of time?
And it turned out that, as we will see,
that this wave function has a very
interesting contribution, sort of
topological or geometric contribution.
There are various sort of descriptions
of it that appear in the literature.
That was completely counter-intuitive and
that takes some time to
digest even after derivation.
So now let me formulate the problem
that he solved more precisely and
proceed to the actual
solution of the problem and
to the formulation of this
theory of the Berry phase.
So let's imagine that we have
a Hamiltonian that depends on
a parameter lambda.
Okay, so this could be anything.
For example, it can be magnetic field or
it can be some parameters of
a harmonic oscillator,
let's say the frequency or something else.
So whatever you want to think about, so
let's say we have some set of parameters
lambda and
we combine those parameter in a vector.
So in principle it could be more than one
parameter and we just construct sort of
a vector in the parameter space which
doesn't have to be three-dimensional.
But let me just for
the sake of simplicity,
let me imagine that I have
a three-dimensional parameter space.
So let's say this is going to be lambda x,
lambda 1, lambda 2, lambda 3.
Okay, and
let me consider the situation where this
parameter lambda is changing in time.
So for example, again, it can be
a magnetic field that has changed.
And also let me consider the situation
where after a certain period
of time capital T, so the parameter
returns to the original point.
So if this my parameter space, so
basically what I'm talking about,
I'm talking about a slow evolution of this
lambda such that it starts at a certain
point and returns to the same
point after time capital T.
So and
as I advertised in the previous slides, so
what I want to know is what
happens with the wave function.
So I have some initial condition for
the wave function.
And so the Hamiltonian after this
period capital T returns to itself.
But the wave function does not
necessarily have to return to itself.
So the question that we're interested in
is what happens with this wave function.
As a first step in this derivation, let me
define precisely what I mean by slow or
adiabatic perturbation.
So what does it actually mean that the
Hamiltonian is changing slowly with time?
And to provide this definition,
let me formulate an instantaneous
eigenvalue problem for the Hamiltonian.
So the Hamiltonian itself is changing
with time, so there is no reason for
us to write a stationary Schroedinger
equation, but nevertheless,
mathematically it is well defined.
So we can consider at any moment of time
t, we can consider an eigenvalue problem
for this H(t) and
we can find a set of eigen functions and
the corresponding eigenvalues
which I denote as E sub n(t).
So for the sake of simplicity, let me
actually assume that the spectrum of
the Hamiltonian is discrete, so
I have just a set of discrete levels.
So n=0, n=1, etc.
Also let me assume that
the initial condition for
the wave function psi at t=0 is one of
the eigenstates of my Hamiltonian at t=0.
So for the sake of concreteness
let me actually assume that
this is the ground state, so n=0 at t=0.
So by the way, it's not necessary
really for the main conclusions
of the derivation, but for the sake of
completeness, let me just be specific.
Okay, now let us recall what we discussed
actually in the previous part of this
lecture, where we dealt with the opposite
case of fast or sudden perturbations.
So there we know that if we
change the Hamiltonian very fast,
the initial state,
which in this case is the ground state,
would be sort of redistributed
all over the place.
So the particle after the quench,
or after fast sudden change,
would exist in all possible
eigenstates of the new Hamiltonian.
And in some sense, it's natural to
define slow perturbation as the opposite
to sudden perturbation,
that is to say that we will define a slow
perturbation such that it
does not induce transitions.
So basically what happens here is,
let's say this is the parameter
lambda at t=0 and we have our initial
state, the ground state, with n=0 and
as I change my lambda with time, so
these energy levels start to move.
So the energy levels really are these
solutions to this eigenvalue problem, but
the Hamiltonian is changing.
So the energy levels are moving and
in principle,
also the explicit wave
functions are changing.
And what I can imagine happening is that
the particle, which initially was a sort
of confined to the ground state, can in
principle propagate to all other states.
And this indeed will happen if the change
in the Hamiltonian is fast enough.
But if it is slow, and
this will be the definition of slow,
the state of the system would remain
in the instantaneous ground
state of my Hamiltonian.
And also in this case, if I start from
this point in the parameter space return
to the same point in the parameter space.
So, at the end of this particular
revolution, basically I'm requiring them
that this system would remain
in the old grounds state.
And this will be my definition
of the sloped innovation.
So, to mathematically define
a precise condition for
this to happen requires
a little bit of work and
that provides this iteration in
the supplementary material in the nodes.
And if you go through this iteration,
you will see that the condition for
this to happen for the condition for
having no transitions is
that the the liberty for the Hameltonian,
which is an operator and the matrix
element of this thdt between two states,
let say this ground state and for
example the first excited state, this must
be much smaller than the level spacing,
the distance between these energy
levels divided by the typical time,
the characteristic time at which
the change in the Hamiltonian occurs.
So this is the definition,
if you're wondering the constraint
that we have to satisfy in order for
the deprivation to be slow.
And one thing that we notice
here is that of course if
En minus E of 0 vanishes
that is if the levels cross,
or if they come very close to one another,
so this condition cannot be satisfied,
because when necessary it will induce
transitions between these states.
But the gaps don't close, if the level
spacings remains large enough,
and if the change in
the Hamiltonian is slow enough.
So, we can satisfy this
condition to good approximation,
we can assume that the system remains in
the ground state during the evolution.
So, now we're in the position to actually
derive this Geometric Berry phase and
what it entails is essentially
solving the Schrödinger equation,
the time dependent Schrödinger equation,
under the assumption of this slow
perturbation that does
not induce transitions.
So, this is my Schrödinger equation.
I'm just writing it down again.
And here,
I'm basically requiring that side
of t remains proportional
to the ground state.
And the only thing I can
have here is a phase, right?
Because, well, the total number of
particles he is conserved so therefore,
I cannot have here any coefficient
who's absolute value is larger than 1,
because it would imply that
the probability to find the particle and
distance and the ground state is larger
than 1, and it doesn't make any sense.
So, and I also require that well within
my approximation the transition remains
in the ground.
So there's basically only one possibility
for this to happen, if this efficient,
relating the WEE function time T and
the instantaneous ground state,
is a pure phase,
is a I FI T where I is a real function.
So under these assumptions,
what remains is to find this quantum fix.
I mean everything else we know.
So, this is really the remaining unknown,
in our adiabatic time dependent problem.
And if we plug in this form of
the solution, back into the Schrodinger
equation, and recall that by definition,
this 0t is The instantaneous
eigen state of the Hamiltonian, so
we will simply get, so basically,
combining these two things will lead to
the Schroedinger equation in this form.
So it will be ih d over dt
of psi of t in this form is
equal to the energy of the ground state,
which is time dependent
in this case because
the energy are moving around and
psi t, okay.
And well so, this is no longer an operator
actually, this is just a function.
And naively you may sort of assume
that there exists a simple
solution to this problem.
Where phi would be equal to sort of a
generalization of the usual quantum phase
that appears even in the time independent
from, so we could naively just write it as
minus one over H bar
an integral from 0 to t,
e naught of t prime, dt prime.
So again, if the Hamiltonian were not to
depend on time, that is in this picture
would mean that basically lambda is just a
point, which stays there, so I would just
get the quantum phase being interval i
minus i over h bar energy times time,
which is the usual quantum phase that
appears in stationary quantum mechanics.
So here, instead I may just go ahead and
integrate from 0 to t.
Well it turns out, however,
that this is not entirely correct and
there exists an important continuation
which theorists, well to this quantum fix.
And let me write this contribution
as gamma, and this additional phase
gamma that we will derive in a second is
exactly what is called the Berry phase.
So, this is our main quantity of interest.
While the first part is sort
of the usual dynamical phase,
it's actually called dynamical phase.
Let me,
you note it as theta with the subscript d,
and this is called dynamical phase.
If we plug in now back,
basically, this expression for
the phase back into
the Schrodinger equation,
we're going to get in the left hand side,
we're going to get the following terms.
So, there is going to be
derivative 0f either the power i,
theta, e to the power i, gamma.
And there will be
the instantaneous ground state, 0t.
And the right hand side
will remain the same.
So in here, we have the time [INAUDIBLE]
which is going to add on three terms, so
they're going to be three
contributions in the left hand side.
So, the first contribution
essentially by construction
is going to cancel out
the right hand side.
So, if we differentiate this exponential,
so we can just write it down,
is going to be i h bar times i theta
d dot times psi and this theta
d dot is this the derivative for
this integral, which will just
pull out the value of the energy.
So, this whole thing is going to be equal
to the energy as a function of time.
Which will be cancelled by the same
term in the right hand side.
So, there's going to be
also another term here, so
it's going to be i h bar,
i gamma dot times psi.
And finally there's going to be
a derivative of the wave function itself.
So the eigen states are changing,
so the Hamiltonian is changing,
and so do the eigen states, so therefore
there's going to be another theorem,
so let me write it, plus i h bar,
into the power i theta + gamma,
here we're going to have
the derivative of this guy.
And the right hand side is e naught Times
psi, which as I already mentioned is
going to be cancelled precisely by
the first term in the left-hand side.
That's why we introduced this
dynamical phase in the first place.
And now what remains is simply
to balance out these two terms.
And as you can see,
a lot of things cancel out.
So the Planck constant cancels out.
So the phase factors in this room
are going to be cancelled by
the corresponding phase
factors in this wave function.
So this goes away, and
I times I is equals to -1, and so
what we can write is the foil.
So, let's say in the left hand side
we're going to have a gamma dot.
The wave function, the ground state wave
function is equal, basically to this guy,
I G over GT 0T.
So, finally what we can do here,
we can take advantage of the fact
that we have normalized states.
So, the number of
particles is conserved and
our particle exist In this ground state.
Therefore, this bracket product of
this instantaneous ground state with
itself is equal to one.
And so if we multiply this equation
from the left by Brah vector 0t,
so we're going to have simply
one in the left-hand side.
And we're going to have 0t,
d over dt, 0t on the right-hand side.
So therefore, what we can do,
we can write the Berry phase,
well this Berry phase gamma at a time t
as an integral from 0 to capital T.
So this is the time that
it takes the particle,
well the system to return to
the original Hamiltonian.
And under this integral we are going
to have 0t, d over dt, 0t.
It is an integral over time.
So, we get this interesting term.
Which is the Berry phase.
And as we shall discuss in the last slide.
So this term has a very interesting
geometric interpretation.
That's why it's called a geometric phase.
To see this, let us recall the definition
of these eigen states, 0t.
So, those are the instantaneous
Eigen states of the Hamiltonian,
but per our assumption, so
the Hamiltonian depends on time
only through the parameter lambda,
this is the actual parameter lambda.
So, instead of writing this guy as
being parameterized by t, we can as
well parameterize them by this parameter
lambda, this parameter space here.
And If we do so,
we can transform these integral over
time into an integral over
a lambda in this parameter space.
And this would acquire a very curious,
as I said, geometric interpretation.
So, almost the last step here is to
perform a change of variables and
to go from an integral over time
to an integral over lambda.
And this can be done by simply writing.
So here, this d over dt can be written.
So, this is the identity.
It can written as D lambda over dt,
d over d lambda.
Okay?
And on the other hand when this guy is
going to multiply this differential.
So, we can simply replace this product.
By, d lambda.
And so,
another way to write this Berry phase.
So, let me present it here.
So, gamma can be written as an integral.
And now this integral will go actually
around this loop in this parameter space.
So, it's going to be a closed integral.
So, let's say this contour we call it c.
So, it' going to be
basically encircling the c.
And here we're going to have 0 lambda,
d over d lambda, 0 lambda, d lambda.
Okay.
So, this is just another way to
write essentially the same quantity.
But the time is completely
gone from our description,
even though we started with
a time-dependent problem.
So here, time is not essential anymore.
So another thing we can do,
we can introduce a new notation.
Let me call it a [INAUDIBLE],
a is the function of lambda,
which is by definition
going to be this guy.
And so in these notations we can see
that the at Berry phase is nothing but
a circulation of this
potential if you want.
A of lambda around this too okay.
So, another thing that we can do here,
we can take advantage of certain
identities from the vector analysis.
Hopefully familiar to some of you who have
studied the theory of vector magnetism.
Namely, we can define
the curl of this vector a.
So, let's define the curl of a,
curl with this respect to this lambda.
And let me call it b of lambda.
And if we do so, this Berry phase gamma
can be rewritten as a flux of this,
I will call it fictitious
magnetic field through
the area enclosed by this loop that
corresponds to this quantum evolution.
Okay so, essentially, well it's very
complicated but, so those of you who,
again, are familiar with the theory of
electromagnetism may remember that to
describe magnetic fields in real
space is often times convenient
to introduce a vector potential such
that the curl of this vector potential
is the magnetic field.
And so here, instead of the real space,
we have this sort of fictitious parameter
space, which does not have to be real
space, it can be something else,
can be just a set of
parameters in our problem.
And what we found is that the quantal
phase that will be acquired by the wave
function as a result of this evolution
Is essentially a flat of some fictitious
magnetic field that exists in this model.
Okay?
So by the way,
even though we started with a time
dependent problem, this b of lambda and
the corresponding deterpotential e
can be calculated by themselves.
So, if we just have a Hamiltonian,
which depends on lambda, whether or
not it depends on time
is a separate matter.
We can just go ahead and
calculate these properties.
And so what we may think about is that
when we have a quantum system which is
parameterized by some parameter lambda.
So there exists an internal,
in some sense fictitious magnetic
field in this parameter space.
And so it exists whether or
not we perform quantum evolution, but
if we do perform quantum evolution, and
if we have this sort of pejorative
time dependent perturbation.
So the quantum phases,
it will be acquired by the particle
is going to be basically
the flux of this magnetic field,
if you want through this
area enclosed by this loop.
And that's why it's called
the geometric phase,
sometimes it's also
called topological phase.
It's a very nontrivial concept,
so I mean, first of all,
it was not discovered in the early
days of quantum mechanics.
It was discovered only in the ages,
and furthermore, only now, and
this is basically the subject
of current research,
we are starting to understand the true
importance of this Berry phase.
And one of the recent discoveries
that you might have heard about is so
called topological insulators.
So suddenly, I didn't have time to talk
about these quite amazing discoveries.
But I just wanted to mention them in
passing to sort of emphasize that this is
not just a pure mathematical construct,
which is sort of elegant by itself, but
also does have important
physical applications, and
this is the subject of current research.
So, the final thing I'm going to mention
here, sort of concluding this technical
discussion, is that unlike
the magnetic field, in real space
which does not sources or sinks, so
there are no monopoles as we know.
So, the degradations of
the magnetic pool to zero.
So this fictitious magnetic
field actually can have sources.
And, these sources are, well some sort
of monopoles, in this parameter space,
to respond to the degeneracies
in the spectrum of the problem.
So what it actually means, and
this is one of the results,
understood by Barry in his original paper,
is that if we have some value,
some special values of parameter lambda,
let's say lambda star.
Such that there exist two wave
functions with the same energy.
So basically the energy levels cross so
then these points,
let's say this point serve as sources or
monopoles of this magnetic
field in this parameter space.
This is also a very interesting result.
Well, it's a very interesting subject.
I could definitely talk more about it.
It's a very exciting field.
But I feel that I probably
should stop here,
because I've been talking for 25 minutes
now in this last part of the last lecture.
And I just would like to thank
you very much for your attention.
I hope that this lecture, and in general
the course, were interesting and useful,
at least some parts of it,
and I wish you all the best.
Thank you very much.